♪ ♪
>> MARVIN (speaking Spanish):
(siren blaring)
(indistinct chatter)
(monitor beeping)
>> What's that?
>> We need a medium-sized
allevyn pad cut in half.
>> Okay.
>> Bring me a clean specimen bag
for me to put this in.
>> Zully's case was very unique
for us
because this was one of our
first few cases with a mom
who was extremely sick and
COVID-positive.
Was the baby going to be
extremely sick
and infected as a result
of COVID, too?
We did not know that at that
time.
There was not a lot of data
there.
Now we know that most babies
don't get extremely sick
with COVID, but at that time
we were not aware of that.
>> The baby did have several
tests done,
and he tested negative.
But we knew that mom was
positive,
and then we had to safely
execute on a plan for him
to go home to a safe
environment.
♪ ♪
Billy's gonna check your
temperature.
>> Any symptoms? Okay.
>> MARVIN:
>> I said, "Listen, Marvin, I am
willing to help 100%.
I really did not know this
family.
I mean, Zully just came to the
United States,
I think, a year ago, and Marvin
has been here
for six years.
And Junior is my bilingual
student.
And that's how I met them.
When we were able to test Marvin
and Junior,
they were both
COVID-19-positive.
This baby would have not stood
a chance if he went home
with his father with COVID-19
and Junior.
He's just a preemie baby.
I went to the hospital with
Marvin.
Oh, my God.
Hi, baby.
>> LUCIANA (speaking Spanish):
It wasn't easy because,
you know,
he saw his son for the first
time,
and he couldn't
even go near him.
And it really broke my heart.
After going through
such a big trauma
not even knowing if your wife
was gonna make it.
I took the baby home.
Right, baby?
(baby fussing)
Hold it, hold it, hold it.
There you go, you can trust.
Right, buddy?
I was thinking I was staying
with the baby
for one and two days,
and now I am three weeks.
(indistinct chatter)
>> So how many patients do we
have now?
>> We have... nine.
>> Zully, who is young compared
to most of our patients,
she was brought down to the ICU
knowing
that her oxygen level had gotten
precariously worse.
We decided that we were gonna
have to intubate her
or put her on a breathing
machine
to help support her oxygen.
(monitor beeping)
>> This patient over there, when
I started him, he was on 100%...
>> The night nurse gave me my
assignment, which was Zully,
and she said,
"She's 30 years old.
She just had a baby.
She's really sick.
She was super unstable
overnight,
and she's gonna be your only
patient right now,
so you only can... you only have
to focus on her."
She was absolutely one of the
sickest patients on the floor
at that time, and I thought she
very well might not make it
through this.
And that was-that was
terrifying.
(monitor beeping)
(indistinct chatter)
>> While she was intubated,
she spent a good majority of the
time actually upside down
on a fancy bed that actually
takes you
and turns you completely over.
So when you're on that, she was
completely in a coma.
>> In my head I said
she's-she's not gonna die
on my time.
I'm not gonna let that happen.
>> She's okay? Okay.
>> Can I have the patient's
first and last name, please?
>> Zully...
♪ ♪
>> Ah.
(both laughing)
>> She was in the ICU almost
three weeks total, I think.
She was on the ventilator for
about 18 days,
and then another day
or two afterwards
as we were waking her up and
regaining her strength.
(dialogue indistinct)
>> We got you.
>> It takes a while to get their
body back up and running.
>> Do you need to rest?
>> It's an unfortunate
consequence of being in the ICU.
It's something we try to work
through with our patients.
>> All right. Ooh...
>> Ooh.
>> Good job.
>> (laughs)
>> There are instances of
patients who have PTSD
from being in the ICU.
(monitors beeping)
>> ZULLY (speaking Spanish):
>> Most people who were in the
ICU take weeks if not months
to gain her strength back.
I imagine that's what she's
going through.
But most people will tell you
even their mind isn't back
where-where they were.
>> ZULLY:
>> CATALINA (speaking Spanish):
We met Zully and Marvin at the
very beginning,
when she was hospitalized.
When Zully was fighting for her
life, um,
we had people going every day to
provide food to him
and to Junior.
Toys to him.
There was a phone call every
day.
"How are you doing?
What else do you need?"
>> (speaking Spanish):
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Stamford is a very unique
community in which, you know,
almost 35% of the population is
foreign-born.
>> (speaking Spanish):
And the pandemic was effecting
families
like Zully's disproportionately.
The whole pandemic and how it
evolved and how fast
it all happened, this is still
hard to comprehend
for all of us.
So many people were losing
their jobs.
So many families did not have a
way to feed their kids
or pay the rent.
So the community at large really
rallied.
>> He's a very good baby.
Here, buddy.
>> He's okay.
>> He's okay?
>> He's got a little hot...
>> I came here when I was 17
years old from Brazil.
My husband was an illegal
immigrant.
He came here when he was
19 years old.
And look at him now.
I mean, he is an immigrant who
worked his way up.
It's the American dream.
(phone rings)
>> MARVIN:
>> Hi.
>> LUCIANA:
>> MARVIN:
>> Call on hold.
>> I know.
It's that time, buddy.
I know. It's okay.
(baby crying)
(phone rings)
>> Oh, it looks like the
hospital.
Hello?
All of a sudden,
I get a phone call,
and it's a doctor from the
hospital, and they just tell me,
"Oh, uh, Zully is being
discharged today at 4:00.
Somebody needs to be here
to pick her up."
Okay, we're sending her home,
but her husband was not...
You know he's COVID-19 positive
and the brother is COVID-19
positive
and the baby's COVID-19
negative.
So...
I was in shock when I received
that phone call
because I really thought she was
going to still be hospitalized
for one more week at least.
But if it was a person with
insurance,
then they would probably send
her to a rehab, right?
When do we have to pick her up?
How does this work?
I mean, I'm-I'm just a teacher.
I don't know how this works.
I needed to pick her up at 4:00.
And I looked at my watch
and I'm like,
"Wait a second, it's 2:45."
We can't. I am sorry.
You're telling me you're giving
me one hour to make arrangements
for a patient who has been in an
induced coma for a-a month?
You cannot discharge this woman
in one hour.
I am sorry, I just can't...
(crying)
♪ ♪
>> How to get Zully home became
an entire project for all of us.
I mean, their house seemed like
thousands of miles away.
So I called the ambulance,
I made the appointment.
I told him to be there as late
as possible
to give us time to prepare.
Then we went over to the house
to wait for her to arrive.
(speaking Spanish):
Eh?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> CATALINA:
>> Junior!
(speaking Spanish):
>> AURORA:
>> They're coming now.
>> Oh...
>> LUCIANA:
Ah, Zully!
(cheering, applause)
Zully!
Yay, Zully!
Welcome home.
Bievenida, Zully.
(laughs)
>> Mommy?
>> ZULLY:
>> Good? That's it?
>> Thank you, guys. Thank you.
>> You're welcome.
>> ZULLY:
>> JUNIOR:
>> AURORA:
>> Ready?
>> ♪ Happy birthday to you,
happy birthday to you ♪
♪ Happy birthday baby Neysel,
happy birthday to you. ♪
>> LUCIANA:
>> AURORA:
>> ZULLY:
>> Bye, guys.
>> Hasta luego.
>> ZULLY:
♪ ♪
>> MARVIN:
>> Okay, ready?
>> Okay, all set.
>> MARVIN:
>> Okay, let me try it.
>> (screams)
>> MARVIN: Ya, papi. Ya, ya.
>> (groans)
>> You almost got it.
>> MARVIN:
>> Thank you for holding.
Your call is very important
to us.
(hold music playing)
>> Okay, you had two tests done.
And one was the nasal and the
other one was the blood work.
The nasal swab came back.
The swab is positive.
>> MARVIN:
>> Junior is the same, also.
Mm-hmm.
>> MARVIN:
(Zully crying)
(Marvin exhales)
>> MARVIN:
>> ZULLY:
♪ ♪
>> The whole testing was so
complicated and so convoluted.
And I think this is just so
typical of the challenges
that you face when you have a
language barrier,
when you have a cultural
barrier, when you're scared.
We are very, very hopeful that
her rapid fast test results
in an hour and a half,
they will give us a call.
♪ ♪
>> Yes.
>> ZULLY:
(baby crying)
>> Oh, I know, I know.
Oh, this is so hard.
And today's gonna be a very
special day
because you're gonna meet your
mommy and your daddy
and your brother.
>> (makes laughing sound)
>> (laughs) I love when he does
that.
It's like I was his mommy for
the last five-and-a-half weeks.
And I gave him as much love as I
would give to my own son.
♪ ♪
>> So this is a mess right now
because we're trying to pack
everything for Zully.
There's some extra donated milk,
his little stroller.
>> CATALINA:
>> MARVIN:
>> Oh, his diapers and...
Oh, my God, okay.
My baby.
>> Luciana, we're here.
(laughter)
>> Oh, my God.
>> ZULLY:
>> LUCIANA:
>> Hello, papi.
>> Shh, shh, shh.
Shh, shh, shh.
(indistinct chatter)
(phone ringing)
>> AURORA:
>> LUCIANA:
>> ZULLY:
>> AURORA:
♪ ♪
(phone ringing)
(sound distorted, breaking up)
(phone beeps, call disconnects)
>> (baby fussing)
♪ ♪
>> Go to pbs.org/frontline
for more of our reporting
on the toll of the pandemic on
the Latino community.
And listen to our podcast with
the director
of "Love, Life, & the Virus,"
Oscar Guerra.
>> This is not the reality of
what happens
to most Latino families.
You know, it's rare that it had
this ending
so that's why it makes it
so unique.
>> Connect with "Frontline" on
Facebook and Twitter,
and watch anytime
on the PBS Video App
or pbs.org/frontline.
♪ ♪
>> For more on this and other
"Frontline" programs,
visit our website
at pbs.org/frontline.
♪ ♪
"Frontline's"
"Love, Life and the Virus"
and "Undocumented in the
Pandemic" are available
on Amazon Prime Video.
♪ ♪